Add segmentation blog (#17)
WayScience/waysciencelab.com: _posts/2022-10-31-segmentation.md

---
title: "Segmentation Part I"
author: Jenna Tomkinson
member: jenna-tomkinson
tags:
  - opinions
  - process
---

# A Brief Performance Comparison of Popular Cell Segmentation Software

Welcome back! I hope that you were able to come up with an amazing illumination correction pipeline from [my illumination correction blog post](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2022/08/09/illumcorrect.html) and are ready for segmentation! 
If you are just starting with this blog post, then welcome in!

As a reminder from my previous post, keep in mind that any method or software you use in your pipeline might not be optimal or might not contain the functionalities that you want (e.g. model training, etc.). 
I recommend benchmarking different methods with your own data.

I will be comparing multiple segmentation methods in this blog post, which are:

1.  CellProfiler

2.  Cellpose

3.  Cellpose plugin for CellProfiler

I also tested Ilastik, Weka Trainable Segmentation, and Scikit testing.
From my experience, these performed sub-optimally with my data. I will discuss these methods in part II of my segmentation blog.

**Note:** My segmentation findings in this blog are based on Cell Painting data. 

> For more information on Cell Painting assays and what makes them unique, go through the [GitHub wiki](https://github.com/carpenterlab/2022_Cimini_NatureProtocols/wiki#morphological-image-feature-extraction-from-microscopy-data) from the Broad Institute.

Author: 👍

Cellpose is a software that focuses on segmentation and is described as a "generalist algorithm". 
It has a GUI that is very helpful for prototyping and can be implemented in Python.

Unlike CellProfiler, Cellpose does not have the ability to segment out multiple objects in one run. 
Instead, it provides different pre-trained models to perform segmentation for one specific object per run. 
For Cell Painting data, our lab decided on segmenting nuclei followed by whole cells (which we also call cytoplasm interchangeably).

The best part of Cellpose is, in my opinion, that only three out of all the parameters made a difference in my data (depending on the object that you are trying to segment). 
These are:

1.  Cell Diameter (in pixels)

2.  Flow threshold
   
3.  Model

Cell diameter is so important because if set too large, it could over-segment objects (e.g. include background or merge cells). 
But set too small, it will incorrectly segment a bunch of small regions within the object instead of segmenting it whole. (Figure 3)

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/segmentation/cell_diameter_blog.png"
  width="100%"
%}

> > Figure 3. Comparison of cell diameter (CD) impact on segmentation. This figure demonstrates how CD values can make a big impact on how Cellpose segments nuclei. The left panel shows what happens when the CD is very low (segmenting nuclei into multiple parts) and the right panel shows what happens when the CD is very high (combining nuclei with abstracts). CD was the most important parameter that I toggled when optimizing nuclei segmentation.

Author: Tbh I wasn't really sure what they are. I assumed they were abstracts but definitely could be parts of the cell. I can reword this.

> > Figure 3. Comparison of cell diameter (CD) impact on segmentation. This figure demonstrates how CD values can make a big impact on how Cellpose segments nuclei. The left panel shows what happens when the CD is very low (segmenting nuclei into multiple parts) and the right panel shows what happens when the CD is very high (combining nuclei with abstracts). CD was the most important parameter that I toggled when optimizing nuclei segmentation.

Reviewer: What is an abstract?

> > Figure 3. Comparison of cell diameter (CD) impact on segmentation. This figure demonstrates how CD values can make a big impact on how Cellpose segments nuclei. The left panel shows what happens when the CD is very low (segmenting nuclei into multiple parts) and the right panel shows what happens when the CD is very high (combining nuclei with abstracts). CD was the most important parameter that I toggled when optimizing nuclei segmentation.

Author: @gwaybio 

Sorry I meant artifacts LOL

I had assumed that this link was to whatever file was up to date, but that was incorrect.

Once I downloaded the most recent version of the plugin and put it in the plugins folder, the module for the plugin in CellProfiler had every parameter and model that I would have in Cellpose 2.0 (Figure 5).

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/segmentation/cellpose_plugin_cp.png"
  width="100%"
%}

> Figure 5. Cellpose 2.0 parameters available in the CellProfiler Cellpose plugin. This figure demonstrates that the most up-to-date plugin file does work in CellProfiler and provides parameters (YAY!).

Since I had so many issues with the install, and when you look up "Cellpose plugin for CellProfiler" on Google, it pulls up the forum post
that does not give complete instructions, I have gone ahead and created [a version-controlled document](https://github.com/WayScience/CellProfiler_Prototyping/tree/main/Cellpose_Plugin_CellProfiler_Instructions) for how to install this plugin.

Now, let's talk about some positives!

> The one thing I really liked about this plugin is that it has a parameter called `Supply nuclei image as well?'. 

Author: 👍

After all of this, I believe that this plugin is a great option for Cellprofiler users to have the ability to choose what type of segmentation method they want to use. 
I am excited to be able to use this and to help with the improvement of the module!

## Comparison of the three methods

One of the biggest differences I noticed between Cellpose and CellProfiler was that Cellpose segmentations did not fit the shape of the cells as much as CellProfiler. 
As well, CellProfiler included more of the stringy parts of the actin that Cellpose did not (Figure 8).

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/segmentation/sensitivity_blog_fig.png"
  width="100%"
%}

> Figure 8. Comparison of sensitivity between Cellpose and CellProfiler. This figure shows how CellProfiler segments cells much tighter and includes small parts compared to Cellpose. Cellpose segments cells more broadly and includes more of the background compared to CellProfiler.

> After doing a lot of prototyping with both CellProfiler and Cellpose, I believe that Cellpose segments whole cells much better (e.g. no cell is segmented over each other) than CellProfiler (Figure 9).

Reviewer: wait a sec, I thought you just said in lines 261 and 262:

> One of the biggest differences I noticed between Cellpose and CellProfiler was that Cellpose segmentations did not fit the shape of the cells as much as CellProfiler. 
> As well, CellProfiler included more of the stringy parts of the actin that Cellpose did not (Figure 8).

Doesn't this contradict that Cellpose segments whole cells much better? Where am I confused?

Author: @gwaybio 

From my perspective, I am comparing two different metrics; sensitivity and whole cell segmentation. 

CellProfiler is much more sensitive, but Cellpose segments the whole cell more accurately/better.

Reviewer: got it!

For the Cellpose method, in the projects within the lab, we created custom Python functions to make sure that any nuclei that fall in between a cytoplasm is included and any cytoplasm without nuclei is gotten rid of.

With that being said, it is also good to keep in mind that the CellProfiler Cellpose plugin does not automatically connect different objects. 
This will impact downstream processing and analysis since you won't be able to, for example, connect the cells to their nuclei without additional customization (e.g. create custom Python functions, etc.).

In all, I think that the CellProfiler Cellpose plugin would work much better if it included the CellProfiler method of using segmented nuclei as the base for segmenting the whole cells or to add functionality that can connect the cytoplasm to their respective nucleus (or nuclei). 
This will be a project that I will be pursuing in the future!

## Conclusion

After all of the prototyping, I have come to one conclusion: All these segmentation methods are good! 
They are all very easy to use and seem to work well by eye. 

> It is yet to be seen if these subtle segmentation differences that I discussed will impact cell morphologies and thesubsequent biology that we discover (e.g. biomarkers for gene deficiency).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is yet to be seen if these subtle segmentation differences that I discussed will impact cell morphologies and the subsequent biology that we discover (e.g. biomarkers for gene deficiency).
```

Author: 👍

I will be using all of them for various projects and not one of them is substantially better than the other. 
They each have their pros and cons that I have talked about, where you can easily decide which one will be best for your project (Table 1). 
I highly recommend prototyping with each of them before deciding for yourself.

I hope that my testing has helped you and I will be seeing you next time when I go over feature extraction methods!

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/segmentation/segmentation_table.png"
  width="100%"
%}

> > Table 1. Pros and cons between segmentation methods.

Reviewer: Do I recall that you said Cellpose does in fact have a CLI?

Reviewer: I think python should be row 3 (before prototyping) (super nitpicky, I know)

Author: @gwaybio 

For the first comment, yes it does have a CLI but I never tested it, so I put in the key for N/A that is means "not applicable, did not test". I am sure where I could put that information.

No worries on the second comment, I will edit it.
